Add guidance for .NET library dependency versions (#49958)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/library-guidance/dependencies-net.md

Reviewer: You'll need to add this to the TOC somewhere. Maybe below [this article](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/library-guidance/cross-platform-targeting) in [this file](https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/e10eab7e0a8d6c4bb10950287354bd98faf3e1a7/docs/standard/library-guidance/toc.yml#L8)?

> # Guidance for Selecting .NET Library Dependency Versions

Author: ```suggestion
---
ai-usage: ai-assisted
---
# Guidance for .NET library dependency versions
```

✔️ CONSIDER changing your approach through the lifecycle of your library
❌ DO NOT assume any policy is incorrect, all policies are technically sound and supported with different tradeoffs for consumption

---

## **Strategies for Dependency Version Selection**

### **Option 1: Latest Supported Versions**
Reference the latest supported version of the dependency across all target frameworks.  For example: reference 10.0 packages on `netstandard2.0`, `net8.0`, `net9.0`, and `net10.0`
> **Note:** The lifetime of the latest Short-Term Support (STS) release now aligns with the latest LTS release, so choosing “latest” effectively means choosing the latest supported version regardless of STS or LTS designation.
> **Note:** Not all packages support targeting older frameworks in their latest version. For example: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authorization`.  These packages must be excluded from this policy and must always follow option 2 when used.

**Pros**
- Simplifies decision-making and aligns with stability expectations.
- Reduces complexity in dependency management.
- Encourages modernization and access to new features.

**Cons**

> - Older TFMs may require app-local deployments, increasing app size.

Author: ```suggestion
**Cons**

- Older TFMs may require app-local deployments, increasing app size.
```

---

### **Option 3: Branching**
Reference the latest supported version of the dependency across all target frameworks, but branch your library in sync with target frameworks.  This is the same as Option 1, but each time a new framework is added, a new major version / branch is created to allow for updating the major version of dependencies and adding the new target framework.

**Pros**
- Balances compatibility with flexibility for fast-moving areas.
- Encourages modernization and access to new features.
- Simplifies decision-making and aligns with stability expectations.
- Reduces complexity in dependency management.

**Cons**
- Increased infrastructure cost to maintain concurrent branches.
- No new features for folks who want to stay on older dependencies.

---

## **Decision Matrix**

| Strategy                              | Update Friction  | Engineering Cost |  Servicing Cost  |
|---------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Latest Supported Versions (Option 1)  | Moderate         | Low              | Moderate         |
| TFM-Specific Versions (Option 2)      | Low              | High             | Low / Moderate   |

> | Branching                             | Low              | Low              | High             |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Branching                             | Low              | High             | High             |
```

Author: No, the engineering cost of the branching solution is low.  Here I use "engineering" to mean steady-state engineering cost in main and I contrast that with "servicing cost".

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if we should even give this option. What is an example of a library that would follow this? Where they basically only add new functionality to the latest TFM support? Are there any examples outside of the .NET Team?

Author: This is the option for any product that leverages branches to control risk. I do think it's important to call this out, since it does relate to plenty of folks asking these questions, and shows customers how we solve this problem.  I can run a scan of nuget to see which packages use branching like this.

Author: In the top 100 non-microsoft packages, the following use branches to manage risk, determined by observing lower major versions published after higher major versions.
```
AWSSDK.Core
Castle.Core
Moq
AutoMapper
FluentValidation
Npgsql
FluentAssertions
NUnit
NLog
AWSSDK.S3
RabbitMQ.Client
FluentValidation.DependencyInjectionExtensions
Npgsql.EntityFrameworkCore.PostgreSQL
Elasticsearch.Net
AWSSDK.SecurityToken
FluentValidation.AspNetCore
NodaTime
jQuery
MessagePack
AWSSDK.SQS
```

Reviewer 2: > Maybe I can add a note under branching

That sounds good to me. Thanks

---

## **Recommended Guidance**

- Option 1: Recommended for libraries moving fast and undergoing lots of innovation and feature development.  Consumers are more likely to be on the latest framework.
- Option 2: Recommended for libraries that are stable and do not require new features.  Could be a transition strategy when a library reaches maturity and stops taking large features/
- Option 3: Recommended for libraries that are part of .NET or receive strong customer feedback that option 1 is limiting consumption or blocking adoption.  Could be a transition strategy when Option 1 has too much friction.

---

## **Examples**

### Example 1: Latest Supported Version
```xml
<PropertyGroup>
  <TargetFrameworks>net8.0;net9.0;net10.0</TargetFrameworks>
</PropertyGroup>
<ItemGroup>
  <PackageReference Include="System.Text.Json" Version="10.0.0" />
</ItemGroup>
```

### Example 2: TFM-Specific Versions
```xml
<PropertyGroup>
  <TargetFrameworks>net8.0;net9.0;net10.0</TargetFrameworks>
</PropertyGroup>
<ItemGroup>

>   <PackageReference Condition="'$(TargetFramework)' == 'net8.0'" Include="System.Text.Json" Version="8.0.0" />

Reviewer 2: This example is a little odd because you don't need to PackageReference System.Text.Json at all here.

Author: Good point, I'll chose a different package and note the absence of STJ.

---
ai-usage: ai-assisted
---
# Guidance for .NET library dependency versions

When building libraries that target multiple .NET versions, choosing dependency versions has implications for compatibility, servicing, and ecosystem health. This document outlines the main strategies, their tradeoffs, and recommendations.

---

## **Overview**

Library authors face challenges when deciding which version of a .NET dependency to reference. Newer versions have more API and features, but may require a local redistribution increasing servicing responsibilities of the library and size of the application.  The decision impacts:

> - **Friction of updates** on older runtimes

Reviewer 3: This list of decision impacts is only focusing on the negatives. It doesn't touch on the benefits of utilizing newer features and APIs, bug fixes, performance improvements, etc., nor on what folks need to do to work around the lack of such things, like polyfills, which can be both hard to get right (if possible to get 100% right) and require substantial amounts of code.

> - **Friction of updates** on older runtimes

Author: ```suggestion
- **Friction of updates** on older runtimes.  Friction might be more changes than are desired by the library directly referenced.  This could be the set of changes introduced between major versions of a dependency, the application size due to more app-local dependencies, the application startup performance due to using app-local dependencies without pre-generated native images, etc.
```

- **Engineering complexity** in maintaing the solution
- **Servicing complexity** in managing supported releases

This guidance provides options, tradeoffs, and a decision matrix to help you choose the best approach.
✔️ DO be deliberate in choosing a dependency policy for your library
✔️ DO remove out of support target frameworks from your package.
✔️ CONSIDER choosing an approach that minimizes engineering costs and adjusting based on customer feedback
✔️ CONSIDER changing your approach through the lifecycle of your library
❌ DO NOT assume any policy is incorrect, all policies are technically sound and supported with different tradeoffs for consumption

---

## **Strategies for Dependency Version Selection**

### **Option 1: Latest supported versions**

> Reference the latest supported version of the dependency across all target frameworks.  For example: reference 10.0 packages on `netstandard2.0`, `net8.0`, `net9.0`, and `net10.0`

Reviewer 3: This should probably be qualified with a date this was written or a statement about what release is current; otherwise, it'll be out-of-date when .NET 11 ships.

> **Note:** The lifetime of the latest Short-Term Support (STS) release now aligns with the latest LTS release, so choosing “latest” effectively means choosing the latest supported version regardless of STS or LTS designation.
> **Note:** Not all packages support targeting older frameworks in their latest version. For example: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authorization`.  These packages must be excluded from this policy and must always follow option 2 when used.

**Pros**

- Simplifies decision-making and aligns with stability expectations.
- Reduces complexity in dependency management.

> - Encourages modernization and access to new features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Encourages modernization and enables access to new features.
```

**Cons**

- Users targeting older TFMs will get the latest version's behavior, including any potential breaking changes.
- Larger number of packages to update in comparison to relying on framework provided API.

> - May create friction for customers who are not on the latest supported runtime.

Reviewer 3: It'd be helpful to specify what that "friction" looks like

> - May prevent consumption in enviroments where dependencies are managed by a host application - eg: MSBuild, Visual Studio, Azure Functions V1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- May prevent consumption in enviroments where dependencies are managed by a host application until the host updates to the corresponding version - eg: MSBuild, Visual Studio, Azure Functions V1.
```

---
ai-usage: ai-assisted
---
# Guidance for .NET library dependency versions

When building libraries that target multiple .NET versions, choosing dependency versions has implications for compatibility, servicing, and ecosystem health. This document outlines the main strategies, their tradeoffs, and recommendations.

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you build libraries that target multiple .NET versions, choosing dependency versions has implications for compatibility, servicing, and ecosystem health. This article outlines the main strategies, their tradeoffs, and recommendations.
```

> ## **Overview**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overview
```

Library authors face challenges when deciding which version of a .NET dependency to reference. Newer versions have more API and features, but may require a local redistribution increasing servicing responsibilities of the library and size of the application.  The decision impacts:

- **Friction of updates** on older runtimes.  Friction of updates are any of the cost associated with taking a new version of a libary.  This could be the set of changes introduced between major versions of a dependency, the application size due to more app-local dependencies, the application startup performance due to using app-local dependencies without pre-generated native images, etc.

> - **Development cost** in maintaining the solution.  Here development cost is the cost of doing work in the latest codebase.  This might be managing more complex projects with conditions, the total number of dependencies that need to be updated regularly, the cost of maintaining local source to account for missing features in older dependencies (polyfills), dealing with ifdefs around inconsistent API/features across versions, etc. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Friction of updates** on older runtimes. Friction of updates is the cost associated with taking a new version of a library.  For example, this friction could be the set of changes introduced between major versions of a dependency, the application size due to more app-local dependencies, or the application startup performance due to using app-local dependencies without pregenerated native images.
- **Development cost** in maintaining the solution, which is the cost of doing work in the latest codebase. For example, this cost might be managing more complex projects with conditions, the total number of dependencies that need to be updated regularly, maintaining local source to account for missing features in older dependencies (polyfills), or dealing with ifdefs around inconsistent APIs or features across versions.
```

- **Servicing cost** in managing supported releases.  Here servicing cost is the ongoing cost in keeping release branches building, up to date, and compliant with all supported build tools.

This guidance provides options, tradeoffs, and a decision matrix to help you choose the best approach.
✔️ DO be deliberate in choosing a dependency policy for your library
✔️ DO remove out of support target frameworks from your package.
✔️ CONSIDER choosing an approach that minimizes development costs and adjusting based on customer feedback
✔️ CONSIDER changing your approach through the lifecycle of your library
❌ DO NOT assume any policy is incorrect, all policies are technically sound and supported with different tradeoffs for consumption

---

> ## **Strategies for Dependency Version Selection**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Strategies for dependency version selection
```

### **Option 1: Latest supported versions**

> Reference the latest supported version of the dependency across all target frameworks.  For example at the time this document was written when .NET 10.0 is the latest current release a project would reference reference 10.0 packages on `netstandard2.0`, `net8.0`, `net9.0`, and `net10.0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reference the latest supported version of the dependency across all target frameworks.  For example, if .NET 10.0 is the latest current release, a project would reference 10.0 packages on `netstandard2.0`, `net8.0`, `net9.0`, and `net10.0`.
```

> **Note:** The lifetime of the latest Short-Term Support (STS) release now aligns with the latest LTS release, so choosing “latest” effectively means choosing the latest supported version regardless of STS or LTS designation.
> **Note:** Not all packages support targeting older frameworks in their latest version. For example: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authorization`.  These packages must be excluded from this policy and must always follow option 2 when used.

**Pros**

- Simplifies decision-making and aligns with stability expectations.
- Reduces complexity in dependency management.
- Encourages modernization and enables access to new features.

**Cons**

- Users targeting older TFMs will get the latest version's behavior, including any potential breaking changes.
- Larger number of packages to update in comparison to relying on framework provided API.
- May create friction for customers who are not on the latest supported runtime.

> - May prevent consumption in enviroments where dependencies are managed by a host application - eg: MSBuild, Visual Studio, Azure Functions V1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Might create friction for customers who aren't on the latest supported runtime.
- Might prevent consumption in environments where dependencies are managed by a host application - for example, MSBuild, Visual Studio, and Azure Functions V1.
```

---

> ### **Option 2: TFM-specific versions**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Option 2: TFM-specific versions
```

> Reference different dependency versions per Target Framework Moniker (TFM).  Don't reference packages when the framework provides the API.  For example: 8.0 packages on `net8.0`, 9.0 packages on `net9.0`, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reference different dependency versions per Target Framework Moniker (TFM).  Don't reference packages when the framework provides the API.  For example, reference 8.0 packages on `net8.0`, 9.0 packages on `net9.0`, and so on.
```

- Slows innovation in libraries.
- Greater complexity of infrastructure to maintain seperate dependency sets per target framework.  Central packagge management and dependabot can be be configured to work with this, but it's challenging to get it right.

---

### **Option 3: Branching**

Reference the latest supported version of the dependency across all target frameworks, but create a new release branch your when you change major versions of dependencies.  This is the same as Option 1, but retaining a supported branch allows consumers to choose between staying on older supported packages or getting new features.

❌ AVOID using branching as a way to remove support for in-support frameworks as this removes the feature/support choice for users.

**Pros**

- Balances compatibility with flexibility for fast-moving areas.
- Encourages modernization and access to new features.
- Simplifies decision-making and aligns with stability expectations.
- Reduces complexity in dependency management.

**Cons**

- Increased infrastructure cost to maintain concurrent branches.

> - No new features for folks who want to stay on older dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No new features for consumers who want to stay on older dependencies.
```

---

> ## **Decision matrix**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Decision matrix
```

| Strategy                              | Update Friction  | Development Cost |  Servicing Cost  |
|---------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Latest Supported Versions (Option 1)  | Moderate         | Low              | Moderate         |
| TFM-Specific Versions (Option 2)      | Low              | High             | Low / Moderate   |
| Branching                             | Low              | Low              | High             |

---

## **Key tradeoffs**

- **Friction vs. Innovation:** Latest versions offer new features but have more friction for existing applications on older runtimes.

> - **Development cost:** Configuring multiple dependency groups, dependency updates for those, and managing API gaps can all accumulate to slow down innovation in a fast moving library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Key tradeoffs

- **Friction vs. innovation:** Latest versions offer new features but have more friction for existing applications on older runtimes.
- **Development cost:** Configuring multiple dependency groups, updating dependencies for those, and managing API gaps can all accumulate to slow down innovation in a fast-moving library.
```
